Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
George Zabrowski is a young science fiction writer and editor with four novels, a short
story collection and two anthologies to his credit.
His work is characterized by its serious, thoughtful approach to writing and a novel
execution of ideas.
Zabrowski's formal academic training is in philosophy.
We asked him why with this background he chose to write science fiction.
It seemed to me that science fiction always seemed the natural kind of writing.
I grew up reading science fiction and its materials and the kinds of possibilities that
it opened up to myself as a reader seemed to belong peculiarly to this time as opposed
to the feeling I got when I read Charles Dickens or the 19th century writers, aside from Wells,
of course, who straddled both centuries.
It seemed to belong uniquely to the 20th century.
Of course, I didn't think about it that way.
That came much later.
But I think the instinctive reaction was that it was something that was for me and that
it belonged to my time.
One of the elements that usually typifies definitions of science fiction is that it
is a literature of ideas.
When we asked Zabrowski how philosophical ideas have been handled in science fiction,
he indicated that the approach has generally been superficial.
Well, it's skin deep.
This is surprising, possibly, to a literature that professes to be a literature of ideas.
Yet, two areas, philosophy and cosmology, seemed to be very poorly represented, even
though you would think that science fiction would cover these fields in a very deep fashion.
But this is not really surprising.
The most fiction, most literature, does not use philosophy in any original sense.
What I mean is that philosophy is usually derived from somewhere else, from some thinker,
and then is simply put to some use as background in a science fiction story or even in a contemporary novel.
Most writers are not original thinkers in this regard, even Stapledon,
who is the most overtly philosophical of science fiction writers, is clearly a spinosaist
following the philosophy of spinosa kind of pantheism.
There is not any original philosophizing going on.
Of course, it would be ideal if you could have a science fiction writer who would be an original thinker
and would present original thinking of a philosophical kind in his science fiction.
But then you might say, why don't you just write a book of philosophy and then perhaps use the original philosophical material
that he himself puts forward in his fiction.
We asked Zabrowski if any present-day science fiction writers use this approach.
Bremen does this to some degree. He's written philosophical works of enormous size
and then used the ideas developed there for his science fiction.
That's very, very rare. The kind of marketplace that science fiction has just doesn't demand
that you become a philosopher or a scientist of any original stature to write science fiction.
Do writers aim for particular audiences or niches in science fiction? Zabrowski indicated he does not.
Well, I don't particularly aim for any audience. I simply aim to be clear and to communicate to any reader who can read fiction.
The idea being that such a reader will understand what you have to say.
I simply follow the idea of most writers that you have to communicate.
More on George Zabrowski on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon.
Today's show continues the discussion with Science Fiction author George Zabrowski.
Zabrowski's novels include The Omega Point and its prequel Ashes and Stars, The Star Web,
and the recently published Macro Life, which we will discuss in detail later.
His editing credits include the anthology Faster Than Light.
Zabrowski provided us with many provocative ideas about the current state of science fiction.
For instance, he considers much of what's published in science fiction unoriginal.
Well, if you consider that science fiction has been anywhere between 10 and 15% of all fiction published,
a great number of it is a derivative built on predigested ideas and predigested plots
and a good example takes as a concept of space colonies or the L5, the society type of thing.
It's very often simply been used as just another place to have an adventure of some kind,
or a place to set a murder mystery or a suspense story of some kind or another.
Predigestion seems to be the operative method of the copiers.
Something comes in and it's slightly new and it's not used for itself.
It's used as just another place to have another barbaric adventure or whatever.
It's easier to do this than to be original in each and every case.
I'm afraid that like many other writers, I wrote what I was most influenced by.
But as you go on, you realize that quite possibly there is a way of doing things that is a little more original than that.
According to Zabrowski, it may be the marketplace that influences writers to produce sure-selling, formula-written pieces.
Well, the fact is that most science fiction has built in sales potential.
A science fiction book will sell between 30 or 50 thousand copies no matter who wrote it.
This is unfortunate. Most of the best writers of science fiction however become their own genres.
Clarke, Gazzam, Alpine, Lyon are genres unto themselves within the genre.
People will buy the name no matter what they write.
This is also unfortunate but it is a sign of some progress on the part of the writer.
I think even if you write a fairly experimental kind of book like Macro,
because of the built-in potential there will be a certain number of readers who will buy it.
There will be a smaller number of people who actually buy it because they're interested in that kind of thing.
Maybe their tastes will be widened by it.
You really can't tell. You just have to do what you really want to do.
You can't simply write to fill a niche in the market.
That's what strikes me as being very cynical by many writers.
They do aim for a particular audience and they aim to deliver a certain product and they don't seem to have any other ambitions.
This would be fine if some of these writers were not capable of more, in which case they're betraying their own abilities.
This kind of comment on my part sounds perhaps very noble to many other writers.
Very idealistic and they sort of shake their heads in the way that Clarke shook his head at Billy Budd's innocence.
But that kind of attitude comes out of the environment in which they move.
And I think you can create for yourself an ambitious environment in which you will produce,
or at least have a shot at producing something that will be closer to what you're capable of doing.
On our next show we will discuss Zabrowski's ambitious novel, Macro Life.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Science Fiction author George Zabrowski's first three novels, The Omega Point, Ashes and Stars, and Star Web,
are well-written space operas with overtones of metaphysics, cosmology, and eschatology.
When Zabrowski's fourth novel, Macro Life, was published in hardcover in 1979,
it received rave reviews from such notables as Arthur C. Clarke, Gregory Benford, and Gerard K. O'Neill.
The basic premise of Macro Life is that a culture cannot reach its full potential unless it leaves the planet on which it originated or inhabits.
Right, only in self-contained worlds traveling in interstellar space, or at least in orbit around a planet,
can a culture develop the social systems required for it to flourish.
We asked Zabrowski how he conceived the idea of Macro Life.
And I think I read an article by G. Harry Stein, who was a real hard science kind of buffed,
and he complained that all the really new ideas, just around 1961 I think,
he complained that all the new ideas were being ignored by science fiction,
and that the best speculations were going on, places like General Electric, and think tanks,
and whatever, and the science fiction writers were 25 years behind the times.
So I looked at one of the ideas he mentioned, which was a concept called Macro Life,
and it was written in two words by Dandridge Cole, and this was for something called the Ultimate Human Society.
And Cole made a lot of sense to me, and so I decided then that I was going to write a novel to be called Macro Life.
So Zabrowski took the central premise of Dandridge Cole's idea in 1961 and shaped it into a vision.
Over the years I developed the idea much further than he had taken it.
His macro worlds were on the order of the Queen Mary, 10,000 tons, 10,000 ton world,
but very small, probably closer to O'Neill's concept of space colonies.
My 600 kilometer egg shapes with dozens of levels and asteroid cores at the center
are much more ambitious than anything Cole came up with.
And my, also my primary interest was in the kind of social systems that might develop within this material container,
because you could have almost any kind of social system you want developing within the economic supports
that are provided by this concept of macro life, the kind of self-reproducing space, mobile space colony.
That is, in a fact, a form of life. It moves, it reproduces, it thinks with its human social component.
What does Zabrowski propose would happen if one of the macro life units were to become too heavily populated,
or if a disagreement were to develop? Listen as he explains the possibilities.
The possibilities seem endless, especially for something like the idea of revolt within the human generations.
Whenever people would get to the point of dissatisfaction with a particular system they have,
they would simply create another macro world container using the resources and help of the parent and create their own society within it.
It seems to me that this would give the kind of conservatism and stability that is demanded by human beings in social systems
as well as the openness and sense of creativity and adventure that seems to be lacking from social systems that become too old and don't want to change.
It seems to be an answer to the problem of what is life for.
More on George Zabrowski's macro life on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon.
George Zabrowski's epic science fiction novel, Macro Life, proposes the idea that cultures must leave their dirt worlds in order to develop fully.
We asked Zabrowski why he feels a culture cannot develop fully when it is constrained to a planet's surface.
If the resources of a planet are limited and it has no space-based industry with which to supplement the finitudes of a planetary surface, then I think the culture will suffer primarily because of the finitude.
As I said, an open exploration-oriented, knowledge-oriented renaissance culture deposits a different kind of world in the human heart.
A limited culture deposits an ecological sixties kind of approach in the human heart.
And I think there's a sense of constriction that would develop.
Take the idea of a zero-growth society.
I see that as essentially static, both materially and culturally, in the long run.
It would reach a kind of equilibrium with its environment, recycling everything.
And that would be the end, I would think, of that kind of culture.
The idea of such space colonies has appeared in science fiction, though rarely, but certainly no writer has developed it on the scale that Zabrowski has.
Now there are macro life-like books within the field.
Cities in flight by James Blush is sort of like that.
But the cities don't reproduce.
They are old earth cities that simply have taken to wandering around.
It's proto-macro life of one kind or another.
The ideas have been around, but the kind of coherent, sociocultural approach that I think I've taken in that book, which will be the basis of at least six or seven other novels,
each very vastly different in technique and form from the macro life, just has not been copied by anybody.
The appeal of macro life is that the idea of such grandiose space colonies, as fleshed out by Zabrowski, is new.
It is not a rehashed theme.
In fact, Zabrowski feels the idea may be slow to catch on.
Most science fiction writers still don't see it.
They still feel that we're going to colonize planets on a large scale.
I'm afraid that's a very old imperialistic idea of colonizing.
I think there will be people who will attempt to do something with planets,
especially if we develop terraforming techniques for the transformation of Venus or the moon.
That sort of thing will go on, but frankly, it's very difficult.
It all depends how much energy you have to play around with,
but going to find solar-like planets in other star systems and taking them over,
that really strikes me as a kind of abortion of possible life to come.
That a culture must flee its planet and go into space to bloom,
Zabrowski believes flies in the face of a long tradition in science fiction.
It of course destroys a whole generation of science fictional concepts,
which demand that we colonize the planets of other solar systems,
where I feel if it were possible to do that,
native life might be developing or might one day develop,
and we would be pre-empting possible biological evolution there.
It's pre-empt for all that kind of science fiction, and in fact says that that'll never happen.
A whole science fictional universe dies if you take macro life seriously.
George Zabrowski and the old master, John Campbell, on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
Science Fiction writer George Zabrowski, still in his 30s,
has produced a monumental novel, Macro Life,
whose style, scope and originality will surely influence science fiction for years.
John W. Campbell Jr. has his indelible stamp on the field of science fiction,
primarily through his 34-year editorship of the magazine Astounding Stories.
Zabrowski actually met Campbell shortly before his death in 1971.
We asked him to tell us a bit about the meeting.
He's a very anxious to have a discussion that would not be him agreeing with me
or me agreeing with him.
He picked up a copy, I think, of Orbit by Damon Knight
and a copy of Fantasy and Science Fiction,
and he said the interesting thing is the writers in these two books write beautifully,
but they don't think very much.
And he said, there's a great problem with science fiction is you have people
who write beautifully and don't think, and you have people who think gorgeously
and can't write.
I was very impressed with Campbell, and he valued disagreement above easy agreement.
He told me, if you agree with me, I'll change my mind.
Some consider Campbell's influence on science fiction,
which bordered on actual dominance during the 1940s,
as a positive development.
Others view his contributions with misgiving.
We asked Zabrowski his opinion on the value of Campbell's influence.
His added comments are interesting.
I think it was positive, and I think his disciples do not make the best case for him.
They do not represent his ideas, and I think that it's the worst of John Campbell's effect
on writers and on the publishing of science fiction that has come in for a deserved attack.
The kind of interpretation of Campbell that makes sense out of Campbell's approach.
I think Greg Benford put it to Campbell, basically wanted broader horizons
and a deeper sense of humanity in his writers.
That's the kind of defense that is not made of John W. Campbell.
I think that John Campbell's legitimate heirs are people like Ursula Gwynne,
Gregory Benford, perhaps Odyssey Clark, Philip K. Dick, Gene Wolfe,
the writers who bring a sense of human character into an area of broader horizons
in ideas and considering the future of science and technology
and considering many of the softer sciences.
I think those are the people who defend Campbell along the lines of,
let's have more hard science and engineering in our fiction
don't really understand what he was trying to do.
I think it was James Blish who said that when you say hard science fiction,
what he meant by it is hard science fiction across board,
hard thinking, fine writing, hard characterization,
that unity of values that I alluded to before,
that's what Campbell really pointed to.
And of course he failed to bring about this kind of science fiction,
although he had some success.
Anybody would have to fail to some degree,
but I think the people who defend Campbell are usually those who turn off the literary or ambitious writer.
A six hour meeting of the minds, John Campbell,
the man who probably more than anyone else set the stage for the kind of science fiction being produced today,
and George Zabrowski, one of today's bright stars destined for greater accomplishment.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.